---
layout: post
categories: notes
title: 'Notes: Understanding collaborative learning processes in new learning environments'
tags:
- CSCL
---

## References

**Citekey**: @hmelo-silver2008b

Hmelo-Silver, C. E., Chernobilsky, E., & Jordan, R. (2008). Understanding collaborative learning processes in new learning environments. Instructional Science, 36(5-6), 409–430. doi:10.1007/s11251-008-9063-8


## Summary

This paper builds on the 2003 paper, further explaining how CORDTRA diagrams help us interpret learning.

What I found very useful in this paper in particular is the coding schemes they used to analyze collaborative learning. The coding scheme of "complexity" and "monitoring" could be especially useful for me to analyze use of promisingness tool by students.

Complexity (Bereiter and Scardamalia, 1987; Chernobilsky et al. 2004)
  Telling
  Elaborated telling
  Transforming

Monitoring (Hmelo-Silver 2004)
  Individual monitoring
  Group monitoring
  Self-directed learning
  Other monitoring

## Raw notes

Page: 1
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
Page: 1
Author: bodong  Subject: Highlight  Date: 22/05/2013, 2:17:05 PM
 Frequency
analyses provided an easily interpreted snapshot of each group’s activity. The CORDTRA
analyses provide a more dynamic view that helps researchers and teachers better under-
stand how collaborative learning unfolds.

Page: 1
Author: bodong  Subject: Highlight  Date: 22/05/2013, 2:16:54 PM
The use of Chronologically-Ordered Representations of Discourse
and Tool-Related Activity (CORDTRA) diagrams is one way of achieving this under-
standing.


Page: 2
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
Page: 2
Author: bodong  Subject: Highlight  Date: 22/05/2013, 2:19:19 PM
We frame our work in sociocultural and social constructivist theories which (1) argue
that learning is inherently social and situated (Palincsar 1998) and (2) emphasize the
critical role of tools in mediating learning (Cole 1996).

Page: 2
Author: bodong  Subject: Highlight  Date: 22/05/2013, 2:21:35 PM
We view the learning environment as an activity system (Engestro¨m 1999). In under-
standing this system, we need to investigate the cultural tools that are used—the language
used in discourse and the computer technology that embodies a particular pedagogical
model.

Page: 2
Author: bodong  Subject: Highlight  Date: 22/05/2013, 2:21:08 PM
This requires going beyond coding and
counting of individual speech acts to developing a holistic means by which we can view
learning events as they unfold.

Page: 2
Author: bodong  Subject: Highlight  Date: 22/05/2013, 2:17:45 PM
the general rubric of constructivist learning
environments, which emphasize collaborative engagement in authentic problems (Gijbels
et al. 2006).


Page: 3
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
Page: 3
Author: bodong  Subject: Highlight  Date: 22/05/2013, 2:24:07 PM
 We argue that CORDTRA (Chronologically-Ordered Representation of
Discourse and Tool-Related Activity) can foster holistic visualization of the data while
enabling the ﬁne grain coding, which proved valuable in some of the studies illustrated
above.

Page: 3
Author: bodong  Subject: Highlight  Date: 22/05/2013, 2:25:56 PM
 Other approaches to
analyzing CSCL data include experimental methods (e.g., Rummel and Spada 2005; Su-
thers and Hundhausen 2003), multilevel analysis (Cress 2008; Janssen et al. 2007) and
social network analysis (e.g., Nurmela et al. 1999). Finally, others have used interaction
analysis (Jordan and Henderson 1995; Hmelo-Silver et al. 2007b; Lantz-Andersson et al. in
press) and conversation analysis (e.g., Stahl 2006a, b).

Page: 3
Author: bodong  Subject: Highlight  Date: 22/05/2013, 2:27:11 PM
 As Larkin and Simon (1987) noted, a diagram is often much easier
to interpret than verbal presentations of the same material and can make it easier to
interpret complex patterns.

Page: 3
Author: bodong  Subject: Highlight  Date: 22/05/2013, 2:25:47 PM
Analyzing the complexity of collaborations is often conducted using intricate coding
schemes that quantify different types of utterances

Page: 3
Author: bodong  Subject: Highlight  Date: 22/05/2013, 2:23:45 PM
Some researchers have integrated time into their analyses in a variety of ways. De Laat
and Lally (2003) examined how discourse changed over time in an online discussion using
a combination of critical event recall and content analysis over different discrete phases of
an online discussion. Zemel et al. (2007), developed an emergent coding scheme based on
critical events as they unfolded during sequential online chats. Using multivariate statistics
and chronologically oriented sequences to visualize the data, these individuals were able to
draw conclusions about group interactions. Schu¨mmer et al. (2005) combined discourse
with log data. In their paper, however, they addressed the difﬁculty of representing these
data for analysis. Luckin et al. (2001) and Luckin (2003) presented a means to visualize
their data through CORDFU (Chronologically-Ordered Representation of Discourse and
Features Used).


Page: 4
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
Page: 4
Author: bodong  Subject: Highlight  Date: 22/05/2013, 2:31:07 PM
Other researchers have developed
analytic tools that focus on how a concrete artifact is constructed. In particular, Avouris
et al. (2003) developed the OCAF (Object-oriented Collaboration Analysis Framework) to
work backward from a collaboratively created diagrammatic artifact and study the history
that led to the construction of that artifact.

Page: 4
Author: bodong  Subject: Highlight  Date: 22/05/2013, 2:38:35 PM
CORDTRA diagrams

Page: 4
Author: bodong  Subject: Highlight  Date: 22/05/2013, 2:30:49 PM
Strom et al. (2001) used several directed graphs
to map the semantic space of the instructional discourse as students coordinated conceptual
and procedural knowledge. In a small group CSCL environment, Suthers (2006) developed
uptake graphs to examine how ideas ﬂowed during collaborative knowledge construction
as pairs of students engaged in online discussions.


Page: 5
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
Page: 5
Author: bodong  Subject: Sticky Note  Date: 22/05/2013, 2:39:33 PM
is there a tool available to create such diagrams?

Page: 5
Author: bodong  Subject: Highlight  Date: 22/05/2013, 2:40:16 PM
For this analysis, we compare and contrast two groups: one that collaborated extremely
well and another that was less successful in their collaboration.

Page: 5
Author: bodong  Subject: Highlight  Date: 22/05/2013, 2:40:29 PM
 based on students’ self reports of what they
learned from the interaction at the end of each problem.

Page: 5
Author: bodong  Subject: Highlight  Date: 22/05/2013, 2:40:05 PM
Method

Page: 5
Author: bodong  Subject: Highlight  Date: 22/05/2013, 2:39:00 PM
We use one more effective and one less effective group (deﬁned below) that
collaborated in the STELLAR environment to contrast the CORDTRA analysis with a
‘‘code and count’’ content analysis.


Page: 6
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
Page: 6
Author: bodong  Subject: Highlight  Date: 22/05/2013, 2:45:04 PM
Coding

Page: 6
Author: bodong  Subject: Highlight  Date: 22/05/2013, 2:45:41 PM
A post could be coded for multiple categories but only once within each category.

Page: 6
Author: bodong  Subject: Highlight  Date: 22/05/2013, 2:47:26 PM
The conversations which occurred during the three-week unit were coded for content,
collaboration, complexity, questioning, justiﬁcation, and monitoring.

Page: 6
Author: bodong  Subject: Highlight  Date: 22/05/2013, 2:45:13 PM
When possible, discourse was coded at the unit of a post

Page: 6
Author: bodong  Subject: Highlight  Date: 22/05/2013, 2:41:55 PM
STELLAR (Socio-Technical Environment for Learning and Learning Activity Research) is
an integrated online PBL environment for preservice teachers (Derry 2006; Derry et al.
2006) that includes a learning sciences hypermedia (the Knowledge Web), a library of
videocases, and an online activity structure that gives students and instructors access to a
suite of individual and collaborative tools.


Page: 7
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
Page: 7
Author: bodong  Subject: Highlight  Date: 22/05/2013, 2:47:48 PM
Collaboration was coded by looking at the extent to which students worked with the
ideas that were circulating in the group.


Page: 8
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
Page: 8
Author: bodong  Subject: Highlight  Date: 22/05/2013, 2:52:59 PM
Questions can be indicators of cognitive processing, so we examined whether students
asked for factual information, detailed explanations, or were metacognitive in nature.

Page: 8
Author: bodong  Subject: Highlight  Date: 22/05/2013, 2:53:33 PM
 examine the metacognitive activity that groups and individuals
engaged in.

Page: 8
Author: bodong  Subject: Highlight  Date: 22/05/2013, 2:53:07 PM
The nature of the evidence students used to justify their ideas was coded to examine the
basis for the claims they made.

Page: 8
Author: bodong  Subject: Highlight  Date: 22/05/2013, 2:49:02 PM
To address issues of sophistication or complexity of ideas, the Bereiter and Scardamalia
(1987) scale was adapted. The adapted scale included three categories: telling, elaborated
telling and transforming (Chernobilsky et al. 2004).


Page: 9
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
Page: 9
Author: bodong  Subject: Highlight  Date: 22/05/2013, 2:54:44 PM
Complexity


Page: 10
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
Page: 10
Author: bodong  Subject: Highlight  Date: 22/05/2013, 2:54:36 PM
Monitoring


Page: 11
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
Page: 11
Author: bodong  Subject: Highlight  Date: 22/05/2013, 3:28:50 PM
Frequency counts of content analysis

Page: 11
Author: bodong  Subject: Highlight  Date: 22/05/2013, 2:57:26 PM
Results


Page: 12
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
Page: 12
Author: bodong  Subject: Highlight  Date: 22/05/2013, 3:32:26 PM
CORDTRA analyses


Page: 15
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
Page: 15
Author: bodong  Subject: Highlight  Date: 22/05/2013, 3:35:59 PM
In contrast, in Group 2, the facilitators joined in much later and
made infrequent contributions in the form of questions. This is because in this group the
students themselves asked a number of questions throughout the duration of the problem.

Page: 15
Author: bodong  Subject: Highlight  Date: 22/05/2013, 3:39:33 PM
 Group 2 engaged in group monitoring throughout the activity whereas
Group 1 did not engage in this kind of monitoring until relatively late in the activity.

Page: 15
Author: bodong  Subject: Highlight  Date: 22/05/2013, 3:37:38 PM
Another aspect of how the CORDTRA diagrams help us distinguish the collaborative
activity between two groups is by showing the overall relation between the discourse and
the tool use.

Page: 15
Author: bodong  Subject: Highlight  Date: 22/05/2013, 3:35:44 PM
One point distinguishing the two groups from the outset is how the groups engaged the
facilitator (a TA) and the course instructor (CHS, who also helped facilitate). In Group 1,
the facilitators were involved early and fairly frequently, and asked most of the explanatory
and metacognitive questions.


Page: 17
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
Page: 17
Author: bodong  Subject: Highlight  Date: 22/05/2013, 3:40:43 PM
CORDTRA diagrams also allow zooming in and out on different parts of the activity.


Page: 19
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
Page: 19
Author: bodong  Subject: Highlight  Date: 22/05/2013, 3:48:01 PM
 In contrast, Group 2 asked many questions and used all the
resources available to help with the development of their instructional plan.

Page: 19
Author: bodong  Subject: Highlight  Date: 22/05/2013, 3:49:12 PM
 Both representations have their strengths and weaknesses.

Page: 19
Author: bodong  Subject: Highlight  Date: 22/05/2013, 3:48:57 PM
they are not trivial to construct
and are not easily interpreted in a glance as the histograms used in the frequency analysis.

Page: 19
Author: bodong  Subject: Highlight  Date: 22/05/2013, 3:47:50 PM
Group 1 tended to approach the task
very sequentially—they used the video and the Knowledge Web, and then they developed
their proposal.


Page: 20
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
Page: 20
Author: bodong  Subject: Highlight  Date: 22/05/2013, 3:52:18 PM
This can also help both the facilitators and researchers to focus on the
appropriate parts of the activity that need to be improved either while teaching or during
the post-teaching analyses. Being able to actually accomplish this would require auto-
mating construction of CORDTRA diagrams so that they can be available in a timely
fashion.
