---
layout: post
categories: notes
title: 'Notes: CSILE/Knowledge Forum'
tags:
- knowledge building
---

## References

**Citekey**: @scardamalia2004

Scardamalia, M. (2004). CSILE/Knowledge Forum. In A. Kovalchick & K. Dawson (Eds.), Education and technology: An encyclopedia (pp. 183–192). Santa Barbara, CA: ABC-CLIO.

## Notes

::The origins of CSILE (Computer Supported Intentional Learning Environments) are in research
on knowledge building, on the nature of expertise, and on the socio-cultural dynamics of
innovation. CSILE was designed to (a) make advanced knowledge processes accessible to all
participants, including children, (b) foster the creation and continual improvement of public
artifacts or community knowledge (Scardamalia, 2002), and ( c ) provide a community space for
carrying out this knowledge building work collaboratives. ::

CSILE was first prototyped in a
university course in 1983. By 1986 a fully-functioning networked version was in daily use in an
elementary school. In 1995 it was reengineered, with its affordances for knowledge building
substantially enhanced, and published as Knowledge Forum® (http://www.knowledgeforum.com)
by Learning in Motion.

CSILE
was not management, planning, or productivity software retooled for children; it was
technology specifically designed to support knowledge creation. It was not a collection of tools;
::it was an environment to support the kinds of inquiry, information search, and creative work
with ideas that go on in knowledge-building organizations of all kinds. ::

Knowledge Forum is the only product continuously improved over the years based on research
results arising from active and diverse user communities and reflecting knowledge building
theory, principles, and practices. ::Knowledge Forum development is not driven by technology,
but uses advances in technology to continually enhance and unfold the knowledge building
agenda.::


### Knowledge Building Affordances

::The heart of CSILE/Knowledge Forum is a multimedia community knowledge space. In the
form of notes, participants contribute theories, working models, plans, evidence, reference
material, and so forth to this shared space. The software provides knowledge building supports
both in the creation of these notes and in the ways they are displayed, linked, and made objects
of further work.:: Revisions, elaborations, and reorganizations over time provide a record of
group advances, like the accumulation of research advances in a scholarly discipline.

#### Multiple Perspectives, Multiple Literacies, and Teamwork

• Notes and views support teamwork and collaborative design. Notes are multimedia objects
that can be co-authored. View backgrounds are not simply white backdrops or static bulletin
boards (although they can be used that way); they are collaborative design environments with a
built in graphics program that makes it easy for users to design their own backgrounds.

• Views provide different perspectives on information. As the work of the biologist presented
in the last pane of Figure 1 suggests, this networked technology is used to expand perspectives
rather than solidify roles in which students ask questions and experts answer them.

• Multimedia and other supports provide a way in for all participants to a common discourse.
Notes and views support a range of multimedia objects, from text to video. As an example,
some of these Grade 1 students were not writers at the beginning of the year but did represent
their ideas graphically. Easy assignment of keywords (touching a word in a note with a movable
key icon is all it takes) made it possible for these young students to keyword their notes. These
notes were then available, via keyword searches, for incorporation into new conceptual views.

• Notes and views can be individually or group authored. They can also be entered into private
or public spaces; the default option is that they are contributed to a public forum. Accordingly,
the environment encourages openness in knowledge work while enhancing both individual and
group processes.

• Emergent ideas and goals are supported. Knowledge Forum represents an open environment,
without predetermined boundaries or structures around ideas or activities. Through collective
responsibility for public knowledge spaces, with input from varied sources of expertise, the
environment favors the emergence of big ideas and deep principles.

#### Creating Connections and Public Knowledge

• Flexible build-ons. The first five panes show the varied forms that a build-on structure can
take. The note complex has been rearranged a number of times to give greater meaning to the
concepts of frequency and amplitude. This flexibility can be contrasted with the downward
branching of these same notes in threaded discourse, as illustrated in the last pane of this figure.
Linear discourse forms and isolated ‘conferences’ entrap ideas. Idea connectedness is further facilitated through the following means (see Figures 3-6).

• Annotation, citation, and reference links. Annotations and reference links can be added to
any note. References include pointers back to source notes, so ideas can be viewed in both
original and new contexts. Links to views and subviews can be embedded within either notes
or views. Deep embedding of ideas facilitates deep processing of information.

• Interconnected views. Views can be interlinked: views reference other views, and different
levels of access to views can be used to indicate the centrality or distance of particular views to
the current work of the community.

• Multi-faceted indices. Author-assigned indices (keywords, scaffolds, problem fields, titles)
and automatically assigned indices (author, date, semantic field) make notes available through
a variety of search parameters; a note sorter allows the notes resulting from a search to be
sorted for viewing or transported into another view (also see Figure 1). Citation, commentary,
and notification enhance engagement through drawing all relevant authors back into the
discourses that involve their ideas.

#### Advanced Knowledge Processes

Scaffolding Knowledge Processes. Scaffold supports are Knowledge Forum’s most imitated
feature. They were originally designed to provide procedural facilitation (Scardamalia and
Bereiter, 1983) for fostering expertise in writing, and were titled ‘thinking types.’

• Scaffolds give ideas defined roles in such processes as theory refinement (e.g., This theory
cannot explain...) and constructive criticism. The opportunistic rather than mandated use of
scaffold supports helps students embed these forms of discourse in their everyday work with
ideas. As Pontecorvo (1993) states “forms of discourse become forms of thinking (p 191).”

• The supports contained within any particular scaffold can be used opportunistically and
flexibly in any order.

• Scaffolds are customizable. They can be easily added or modified to support the discourse
needs of a particular community.

Reference and Contribute. Knowledge Forum replaces the common ‘say it in your own words’
norm with the more mature ‘contribute-and-reference’ norm. As illustrated in the italicized text
in Figure 3, cited material is automatically quoted (made visually distinct), with automatic links
back to original sources, and automatic compilation of a bibliography. Users are especially
drawn to this feature, because they see their work referenced rather than copied.

Problems of understanding. A problem field at the header of the note encourages a shift from
topicto problem-based inquiry. Knowledge Forum’s ‘problem space’ encourages the
identification of problems of understanding to guide inquiry. ‘Problem’ searches produce an
overview of the problems that others are working on, so it is easy to contribute to those problem
spaces or start a new field of inquiry.

#### Rise-Above and Improvable Ideas

“Rise-above” notes play a pivotal role in idea improvement. The idea, based on the
philosophical concept of dialectic, is that the most constructive way of dealing with divergent or
opposing ideas is not to decide on a winner or a compromise position but rather to create a new
idea that preserves the value of the competing ideas while “rising above” their incompatibilities.
In the simplest cases a rise-above may be simply a summary or distillation; in the most
compelling cases, the rise-above presents a new idea that all the participants can recognize as
an advance over their previous ideas.

Endless improvability of ideas is further supported by the following:
• Ability to create increasingly high-order conceptual frameworks. It is always possible to
reformulate problems at more complex levels, create a rise-above note that encompasses
previous rise-above notes, or to create a more inclusive view-of-views.
• Review and Revision. Notes and views can be revised at any time, unlike most discussion
environments that disallow changes after a note is posted.
• Published' notes and views. Processes of peer review and new forms of publication engage
students in group editorial processes. Published works appear in a different visual form and
searches can be restricted to the published layer of a database.

#### Individual and Group Portfolios; Evolution of Ideas

#### Ideas and Artifacts as Objects of Discourse

#### Embedded and transformative assessment

Knowledge builders monitor their work, and engage in self-assessment rather than being totally
dependent on external evaluations.
Research tools work in the background of Knowledge Forum to automatically record
activity patterns such as reading, building-on, referencing, and creating views. Results from
these analytic tools can then be fed back into the work as it proceeds, rather than waiting until
the end of a unit of work to provide feedback, when it is too late to make adjustments.

#### The Knowledge Society Network (KSN) and the Virtual Suite of Possibilities
