---
layout: post
categories: notes
title: 'Notes: Computer Support for Knowledge-Building Communities'
tags:
- knowledge building
---

## References

**Citekey**: @scardamalia1994

Scardamalia, M., & Bereiter, C. (1994). Computer Support for Knowledge-Building Communities. Journal of the Learning Sciences, 3(3), 265–283. doi:10.1207/s15327809jls0303_3

## Notes

It has seemed to us that a promising approach to school restructuring
would start by examining how schools (including the high-achieving ones)
limit knowledge-building potential. By addressing fundamental shortcom-
ings, we may find it possible to do more than struggle to catch up.

Although schools are
devoted to teaching useful cognitive skills and formal knowledge, they are
not designed to foster the progressive problem solving that generates the vast
informal knowledge that has been found to characterize expert competence.

::Knowledge-building
discourse is  at the heart of the superior education that  we have in mind. We
argue that  the classroom needs to foster transformational thought,  on the part
of both students and  teachers, and that  the best way to do this is to replace
classroom-bred  discourse  patterns  with  those having more immediate and
natural extensions to  the real world, patterns  whereby ideas  are conceived,
responded to, reframed, and set in historical  context.::


Competitive
sports and businesses are examples  of second-order  environments,  in which
the accomplishments  of participants keep  raising the  standard that the others
strive  for. ::More relevant examples  in education are the sciences  and other
learned  disciplines  in  which  adaptation  involves  making  contributions  to
collective  knowledge.  Because  this  very activity  increases  the  collective
knowledge,  continued adaptation requires contributions  beyond what is al
ready known, thus producing nonasymptotic learning.::  The idea of schools as
knowledge-building  communities  is the idea of making them into second
order environments  on this model.


Suffice  it to say that any hope for technology to have a  role in
restructuring  education  must  take  the  form  of searching  for a third way
something that  is neither  didactic,  activity-centered,  nor a mere compromise
between the two (which is what already  exists  in most schools).
In  searching  for a third  viable form  of schooling,  educational  thinkers
have looked outside the school for models; thus, traditional  apprenticeship
has been examined as a possible model,  one that provides for a natural but
highly  goal-oriented  kind  of learning (Collins, Brown,  & Newman, 1989).

As we suggested, by focusing on the individual student's abilities and dispo-
sitions, educators have failed to grasp the social structures and dynamics that are
required for progressive knowledge building of the kind Whitehead referred to.
In effect, they have remained fixed on a pre-19th century model of science,
dependent on "the occasional genius, or the occasional lucky thought."

::More significant implications follow if the question is reformulated at the
level of the group rather than the individual: Can a classroom function as a
knowledge-building community, similar to the knowledge-building commu-
nities that set the pace for their fields?::

A further implication is that creating new knowledge and learning existing knowledge are not
very different as far as psychological processes are concerned. There is no
patent reason that schooling cannot have the dynamic character of scientific
knowledge building. If there are insurmountable obstacles, they are more
likely to be of a social or attitudinal than of a cognitive kind.


The idea of knowledge as a product, enjoying an existence independent of
individual knowers, presents epistemological difficulties that educators are
not accustomed to contending with.

::Restructuring schools as
knowledge-building communities means, to our minds, getting the
community's efforts directed toward social processes aimed at improving
these objects, with technology providing a particularly facilitative infra-
structure.::

::Our focusing on journal publication may seem like a case of mistaking the
wrapper for the candy bar.:: What about research? What about curiosity? We
do not mean to slight either of these. Surely, scholarly disciplines would not
exist without them. However, these have received ample consideration in
previous thinking about school learning. Neglected until recently have been
(a) the role of discourse and (b) the role of motives other than purely
epistemic ones. Decades ago, Popper (1962) recognized argument and criti-
cism as the driving forces in the advancement of scientific knowledge, with
research having its impact through these discourse processes. Only in the last
few years has talking science (Lemke, 1990) begun to be recognized as a
necessary adjunct to hands-on investigation in school science. The use of
inquiry methods in schools has been based on a frequently disappointed
confidence in the power of children's natural curiosity. ::The study of schol-
arly discourse, as embodied in the journal process, shows us how a wide
range of human motives (including curiosity, of course) is marshaled in the
actual progress of knowledge construction in the disciplines.::


How does one characterize knowledge-building discourse and then recreate
classroom activity to support it? We could imitate at the surface level-for
instance, by having classes produce scholarly journals with peer review. In
fact, the CSILE implementation we describe later has provisions for doing
that, but it is not likely that imitation of surface forms can produce the
radical restructuring necessary to turn schools into real knowledge-building
communities.


::We have roughly divided characteristics for knowledge-building discourse
into three categories: (a) focus on problems and depth of understanding; (b)
decentralized, open knowledge environments for collective understanding;
and ( c) productive interaction within broadly conceived knowledge-building
communities.::

::The
challenge we see for educational technology is to preserve a central role for
the students themselves::, lest they be reduced to passivity by the overwhelm-
ing amounts of authoritative external information available. The surest way
to keep the students in the central role, it would seem, is to ensure that
contacts with outside sources grow out of the local knowledge-building
discourse and that the obtained information is brought back into that dis-
course in ways consistent with the goals and plans of the local group.

::At this point, it is fanciful (but nonetheless exciting) to contemplate
advantages of having communal structures that span the whole of the school
years and that also profitably engage those in research institutes and other
knowledge-creation enterprises.::

::CSILE as an enabling technology
for knowledge-building discourse::

::HOW TECHNOLOGY CAN HELP REFRAME
CLASSROOM DISCOURSE TO SUPPORT
KNOWLEDGE BUILDING::

  * A Community Database at the Center of Classroom Discourse
  * Focus on Problems and Depth of Understanding
  * Decentralized, Open Knowledge Building, With a Focus on Collective Knowledge
    * Reversing the teacher initiates, student responds, teacher evaluates pattern for oral and written discourse.
    * Maximizing the interplay and value of different communication modes.
    * Diverse arrangements for supporting small-group interchanges
    * Increased and diversified response to ideas

Two examples

Evaluations of CSILE to date indicate that CSILE students greatly surpass
students in ordinary classrooms on measures of depth of learning and reflec-
tion, awareness of what they have learned or need to learn, and understand-
ing of learning itself. Moreover, individual achievement, as conventionally
measured, does not suffer. In fact, students do better on standardized tests in
reading, language, and vocabulary (Scardamalia et al., 1992). What most
impresses teachers and observers alike, however, is what the students are
able to do collectively. As the preceding examples suggest, they seem to be
functioning beyond their years, tackling problems and constructing knowl-
edge at levels that one simply does not find in ordinary schools, regardless
of the calibre of students they enroll.

We do not want to suggest that the technology by itself can bring about
the transformation of a school into a knowledge-building community. We
already have evidence that teacher strategies can make a major difference in
the extent to which students engage in collaborative knowledge building
(Bereiter & Scardamalia, in press). Neither do we want to claim that a
knowledge-building community, meeting the specifications set out pre-
viously, has actually been realized.
