---
layout: post
categories: notes
title: 'Notes: Higher Levels of Agency for Children in Knowledge Building'
tags:
- knowledge building
---

## References

**Citekey**: @scardamalia1991

Scardamalia, M., & Bereiter, C. (1991). Higher Levels of Agency for Children in Knowledge Building: A Challenge for the Design of New Knowledge Media. Journal of the Learning Sciences, 1(1), 37–68. doi:10.1207/s15327809jls0101_3


## Notes

This paper is particularly useful:
  * It connects agency with ZPD, and makes it clear KB turns more agency to students and lets students decide ZPD.
  * It reports a set of interesting studies on student questioning, especially the one examining whether students can pick promising questions from those generated by themselves.
  * Although it doesn't explicitly mention epistemology, it "makes clear that we need an epistemology more in keeping with group processes and with students' abilities to focus on promising ideas.  Thus the world 3 epistemology elaborated in the following article." (quote from Marlene)

All points are useful for my thesis.
## Highlights

Abstract: Although adults and children both have zones of proximal development in
which more knowledgeable others play essential roles, there is a difference in
executive control that is most salient in question-answer dialogue. Adult
learners typically ask questions based on their perceived knowledge needs,
whereas with school children, questions are typically asked by the teacher,
based on the teacher's perception of the child's needs. Evidence shows that
children can produce and recognize educationally productive questions and
can adapt them to their knowledge needs. The challenge is to design
environments in which students can use such questions to guide their building
of knowledge, thus assuming a higher level of agency in learning. Computer
Supported Intentional Learning Environments (CSILE), a computer-
supported knowledge medium designed to support intentional learning, is
described, with illustrations of children's use of it in cooperative knowledge
building.

The difference between the Teacher B and Teacher C models becomes, in
these terms, a difference in the control structure of activities in the zone of
proximal development.

__WHO IS IN CHARGE OF THE ZONE OF PROXIMAL DEVELOPMENT?__

 Second is growth toward children's takeover of executive
functions -what amounts to control of the zone of proximal development
itself.
 The Teacher B model emphasizes
"growing into" more mature competence; the Teacher C model adds a
deliberate effort to promote "growing out o f ' dependency.

Much of what we learn as adults is through interaction with peers, where
the zone of proximal development is defined by activities the participants
can handle cooperatively better than they can alone. In such cases, control
of the zone is mutual. When we seek the help of someone more knowledge-
able, it is usually on our own terms. Although dependent on the other's
competence, we retain the regulating role. We know what we want.

We question the maturity of adults who surrender control of their zones of
proximal development to a mentor or cult leader. But with children such
surrender is taken for granted.

BACKGROUND OF CSILE

The two principles illustrated here that we sought to generalize
through CSILE were (a) providing external supports for higher level
cognitive processes and (b) making metacognitive activity, which is nor-
mally hidden and private, overt and a subject for public consideration. This
attention to both the private and the public aspects of cognitive activity
remains characteristic.

THE ROLE OF QUESTION ASKING IN CLASSROOMS

We are focusing on question asking in this article because, as traditionally
carried out in schools, it epitomizes the teacher's control over the zone of
proximal development and the unidirectional flow of information. Teachers
ask the questions, thereby determining the goals of learning activities, and
they evaluate the answers, thereby determining what is to be accepted as
knowledge (Sinclair & Coulthard, 1975)

The typical question-answer discourse of schooling provides no
means for the child to grow into the competencies that underlie the asking
of good questions.
Reciprocal teaching (Brown & Palincsar, 1989), by contrast, creates a
zone of proximal development in which children can grow into the asking of
text-based questions.

Collins and Stevens
(1982) found the questions of skilled inquiry teachers to perform functions
such as the following:
  * Ask for sufficient factors.
  * Ask for similarities in factors between similar cases.
  * Ask for the formulation of an alternative rule.
  * Ask for predictions using hypothetical cases based on irrelevant or insufficient factors.
  * Ask questions that trap students into revealing their misconceptions.
  * Ask series of questions that lead students into a contradiction.

We have seen that question asking is a means by which teachers retain
control over the zone of proximal development. As Dillon (1982) put it:
"The dynamics of a question-answer relationship establish respondents in a
passive, reactive role, fostering dependency and removing a sense of
responsibility, initiative, and a kind of energy" (p. 160). Letting the children
ask the questions might therefore seem to be an obvious way of giving them
ownership over their zones of proximal development.

CAN CHILDREN ASK EDUCATIONALLY PRODUCTIVE QUESTIONS?

QUESTIONS PRODUCED UNDER TEXT-BASED AND KNOWLEDGE-BASED CONDITIONS

This was what we call the
knowledge-based condition, because the students' prior knowledge was the
only basis on which their questions could be formed.

Questions from the knowledge-
based condition averaged significantly higher than those from the text-
based condition, with a mean of 2.52 versus a mean of 1.58.

More important than mean item quality, however, is the actual number
of items generated in a class that are judged to be educationally worthwhile
as guides to study and inquiry. In the text-based condition, 4 of the original
set of 104 questions (4%) were rated 3 or higher, indicating a judgment that
obtaining an answer to the question would produce "an advance in
conceptual understanding." By contrast, 38 questions (46%) produced in
the knowledge-based condition were rated at this level.


BASIC QUESTIONS AND WONDERMENT QUESTIONS

Lack of domain knowledge, therefore, does not seem
to have hampered students in generating questions. Indications of the
students' limited knowledge about fossil fuels do appear, however, in the
kinds of questions asked.

More than half of the questions from the fossil fuels condition represent
what we may term basic information questions and uneducated guesses.

The remaining 47 questions we may call wonderment questions. They
reflect curiosity, puzzlement, skepticism, or a knowledge-based specula-
tion, in contrast to a groping for basic orienting information.

Considering jointly the questioning carried out on the topics of fossil
fuels and endangered species, it appears that the students appropriately
adjust the kinds of questions they ask, according to their level of
kn~wledge.~ If
 they already have a basic understanding of a topic, as with
endangered species, they ask questions that have potential to extend their
conceptual understanding. If they lack elementary knowledge, as with fossil
fuels, they ask questions of a basic "What is it? Where is it? What causes
it?" type. But the asking of such essential questions does not preclude their
also asking wonderment questions of a challenging and stimulating kind.
These findings thus indicate considerablepotential for children to take over
greater control of their zones of proximal development.

__CAN STUDENTS IDENTIFY THE EDUCATIONALLY MOST VALUABLE QUESTIONS FROM AMONG THOSE THEY GENERATE?__

it becomes important to find out how successfully students can select ques-
tions to pursue.

On the topic of endangered species, where students already had some
basic understanding, there was a generally high level of agreement among
children and adults about what questions are of greater or lesser educational
value. Combined student ratings correlated .89 with experimenter ratings
of the 22 questions on this topic. The median correlation of individual
student ratings with experimenter ratings was .60 (n = 25 students) but with
a range of .37 to .90. For fossil fuels questions, however, the pooled-
ratings correlation was only 3 6 over 22 questions. The median correlation
for 24 students was .40 with a range of .14 to .66. In rating the fossil fuels
questions, students and adults seemed to agree in identifying what we have
called wonderment questions as being questions whose investigation will
lead to significant conceptual advance, but in judging basic information
questions, children seemed to have difficulty distinguishing naive questions
that are merely ill conceived from naive questions that raise important
conceptual issues. This was evident from interviews discussed in the full
report of this research (__Scardamalia & Bereiter, 1990__).

What seems to be required, in order for
children successfully to assume executive control in their own zones of
proximal development in a classroom setting, is a social process that allows
the wisest judgments to work their way forward.

COOPERATIVE KNOWLEDGE BUILDING IN A COMPUTER-SUPPORTED INTENTIONAL LEARNING ENVIRONMENT

They also indicate two needs, which we are trying to meet in the redesign of CSILE:
  More ways to link students with common interests.
  Support for pursuit of convergence and coherence.  Correspondingly, CSILE in its current
version lends itself nicely to divergent processes but lacks support for
convergence. Plans for the new architecture include special knowledge-
building environments. One will provide tools for describing and
simulating processes, specifically supporting the kind of constructive
interaction that Miyake (1986) found to go on when pairs of people are
trying to work out an understanding of a process. Another environment
will focus on explanatory coherence, providing an interface for organizing
networks of facts needing explaining and hypotheses explaining the facts,
based on Thagard's (1989) computer implementation of his theory of
explanatory coherence.

Prospects for a Higher Level of Student Agency in Knowledge Building

There is then no question of displacing the teacher. Teachers can be vital
participants in the community knowledge-building process, but they need
no longer constrain it to what they comfortably know. The zone of
proximal development comes to be defined by the knowledge-building
activities that the group, as a collective, can profitably engage in.
Individual differences, so often a grave problem in school, can fall into
place naturally, if the point becomes that everyone should have something
to contribute rather than that everyone should try to excel.

We think this model has not had a chance in education because the
structure of the classroom has forced teachers to assume control of
knowledge building, whether as didactic conveyors of information or
as gentle managers of the intellectual life of the classroom. New knowledge
media open up new possibilities-both for democratizing the knowledge
resources available to schools and for moving knowledge building to the
center of the life of the classroom community.
