---
layout: post
categories: notes
title: 'Notes: Fostering epistemological beliefs and conceptual change in chemistry using knowledge building'
tags:
- knowledge building
- epistemic beliefs
---

## References

**Citekey**: @lam2008

Lam, I., & Chan, C. K. K. (2008). Fostering epistemological beliefs and conceptual change in chemistry using knowledge building. In Proceedings of the 8th international conference on International conference for the learning sciences Volume 1 (Vol. 1, pp. 461–468). Utrecht, The Netherlands: International Society of the Learning Sciences. Retrieved from http://dl.acm.org/citation.cfm?id=1599812.1599868

## Clippings

Abstract:

Various measures  were  collected  at  pre  and  posttests  including  epistemological  beliefs,  conceptual-change  questions  and  online  discourse  and  reflection.  Results  indicated  that  experimentalstudents made more gains than comparison students on both conceptual and epistemologicalmeasures.  Epistemological  beliefs  and  knowledge-building  reflection  were  correlated  withscience learning; regression analyses indicated that knowledge-building reflection and inquirycontributed to conceptual change over and above prior knowledge and epistemological beliefs. (p. 1)

### Introduction

Considerable  debates  and  interests  have  now  been  given  to  examining  cognitive  and  socio-cultural perspectives of learning (Anderson, Reder & Simon, 1997) and conceptual change (Mason, 2007). Traditionally, conceptual  change  has  been  viewed  from  the  cognitive  perspective  emphasizing  cognitive  conflict  (Posner,Strike,  Hewson  &  Gertzog,  1982),  ontological  shifts  (Chi,  Slotta  &  de  Leeuw,  1994)  and  epistemologicalcommitment in knowledge restructuring (Vosniadou & Brewer, 1987). Currently, conceptual change has been examined from the socio-cultural perspective emphasizing enculturation of practice and discursive interactions and social construction of knowledge in the science classroom (Scott, Asoko & Leach, 2007). (p. 1)

Recent  research  on  intentional  conceptual  change  emphasizes  the  role  of  learner’s  intentions, epistemological beliefs, motivation, and agency in knowledge restructuring (Sinatra & Pintrich, 2003). It also points to the need to design learning environments that encourage learners to integrate goal-directed strategies and to develop metaconceptual awareness for intentional conceptual change. A major related strand that has attracted much attention examines epistemological beliefs or beliefs about the nature of knowledge, knowing and learning (Hofer & Pintrinch, 2003). Increased research evidence has shown how these beliefs can facilitate or constrain student understanding, reasoning, thinking, and science learning. For example, research indicated that a belief about knowledge as certain and simple was negatively correlated with conceptual change learning from refutational text. Students’ immature beliefs about learning and knowledge are related to difficulties in their  conceptual  understanding  (Qian  and  Alvermann,  2000).  Students  who  hold  more  sophisticated epistemological beliefs are more likely to consider conflictual and controversial information; epistemological beliefs  have  been  shown  as  a  major  predictor  of  argumentation  (Mason  &  Scirica,  2006).  For  example, Stathopoulou and Vosniadou (2007) examined the relationships between physics-related epistemological beliefs and physics conceptual understanding amongst 10th grade students. (p. 1)

Whereas it is now recognized that cognitive and situated perspectives are to be integrated (Mason, 2007; Vosniadou, 2007), less attention has been given to how learning environment can be designed to bridge these two perspectives, and how to foster epistemological change and metaconceptual awareness mediated by collective discursive practice. (p. 1)

Research on knowledge building has shown how the approach can help restructure scientific discourse,foster  deep  understanding,  and  enhance  inquiry-based  scientific  understanding  (e.g.,  Caswell  and  Bielaczyc,2001; Lee, Chan & van Aalst, 2006; van Aalst & Chan, 2007). Hakkarainen (2004) analysed young students’written productions in Physics posted to CSILE’s database, and indicated that they engaged in epistemic agencyand  pursed  explanation-driven  inquiry  and  some  of  them  moved  towards  theoretical  scientific  explanation.Zhang et al (2007) examined socio-cognitive dynamics examining epistemic agency of students in advancingtheir science knowledge for 5th and 6th grade students. Vosniadou and Kollias (2003) employed KnowledgeForum  to  foster  the  development  of  discourse  and  students’  ideas,  beliefs,  and  metaconceptual  awareness. (p. 2)

This study investigated the role of knowledge building in fostering conceptual andepistemological  changes  in  the  context  of  Grade  10  chemistry  students  collaborating  onKnowledge  Forum  in  a  Hong  Kong  classroom. The  following  research  questions  were  addressed:  (1)  What  were  the  effects  of  knowledge building on science learning and conceptual change? (2) What was the nature of epistemological beliefs, and what were the effects of knowledge building on epistemological change? And (3) What characterized students’ engagement on Knowledge Forum, and what were the relationships among epistemological beliefs, knowledge-building process and conceptual change? (p. 2)

### Method (p. 2)

This study employed a quasi-experimental pre-posttest research design. (p. 2)

Epistemological  Beliefs  Questionnaire.  A  questionnaire  of  28  items  was  designed  based  on  earlierwork  for  elementary  school  science  students  (Conley  et  al.,  2004). (p. 2)

Conceptual-Change Questions.  A  paper  and  pencil  test  was  administered  to  both  classes  to  identifyconceptual  difficulties,  and  to  assess  students’  knowledge  structures  and  understanding  of  the  concepts  ofelectrochemistry. The instrument consisted of open-ended items, multiple-choice and true/false items followedby  giving  reasons  for  the  choices. (p. 3)

The instructional design followed earlier studies using knowledge building in Hong Kong classroom(Lee et al., 2006). A four-phase instructional design was used: (a) Developing a collaborative culture wherestudents  were  asked  to  put  ideas  to  the  public;  (b)  Knowledge-building  inquiry:  Knowledge  Forum  wasintroduced  and  students  engaged  in  posing  problems,  making  conjectures  and  hypotheses,  co-constructingexplanations, comparing different theories and explanations; (c) Deepening and Rise-Above: students deepenedtheir  understanding  using  rise-above  notes  and  synthesized  their  understanding;  and  (d)  alignment  ofassessment:  students  wrote  reflections  and  e-portfolios  identifying  and  capturing  their  own  and  communityprogress in knowledge building in their discourse. (p. 2)

### RESULTS (p. 3)

#### Differences of Science Learning and Conceptual Change for Groups (p. 3)

both  classes  showed  decreases  and  the Knowledge Forum students showed more decreases in several misconceptions. (p. 3)

Knowledge building students outperformed the comparison students on conceptual change scores in electrochemistry. Analyses of students’ pretest and posttest examination questions indicated no differences. (p. 3)

An independent sample t-test on pretest scores indicated no differences at pretest. (p. 4)

#### Differences of Epistemological Change for Groups (p. 4)

the  experimental  students  had  significantly  more  changes  than comparison  students  (t  (77)  =  4.75,  p<.01)  on  overall  scores.  Further  analyses  indicated  that  significant differences  were  found  on  certainty-source  (t  (77)  =  4.47,  p<.01),  and  development  (t  (77)  =  5.48,  p<.01)indicating that Knowledge Building students made more changes from viewing knowledge as simplistic towards complex notions; and from seeing knowledge as static towards knowledge as extendable. (p. 4)

#### Relationships among Epistemological Beliefs, Knowledge Building and ConceptualChange (p. 5)

Correlations indicated that epistemological beliefs were significantly correlated with several pre and postscience learning measures (rs = .27 to .34, p<.05) suggesting that EB is linked to science learning. Significant correlation were also observed between knowledge building reflection(metaconceptual awareness) with pretest epistemological beliefs (r = .33, p<.05) and with post EB development(rs = .36, p<.05). These findings suggest that students with more sophisticated beliefs are more likely to engagein  deeper  reflection.  Further,  there  were  significant  correlations  between  knowledge  building  reflection  andinquiry with conceptual change learning (rs =. 39-.46, p<.05). These finding indicate some positive correlationsamong epistemological beliefs, metaconceptual awareness (reflection) and conceptual change. (p. 5)

We also examined epistemological belief as dependent variables to examine what would contribute to its change. Hierarchical regression analyses showed that pretest epistemological beliefs was a significant predictor(R = .51) explaining 26% of variance. We found that the quantitative knowledge-forum collaboration indexcontributed to posttest EB over and above pretest beliefs. Students who participated on Knowledge Forum with high collaboration activities (notes read, notes linked, and keywords) appeared to shift more tosophisticated beliefs over and above pretest beliefs. (p. 5)

Results indicated that prior conceptual-based scores was a significant predictor (R =.48)that explains 23% of variance of posttest conceptual scores. When knowledge-building reflection was added tothe analyses, multiple R increased to .58 that explains another 10% of variance with significant change. Whenepistemological beliefs were added, there were no increased variances explained. These findings indicate thatover and above prior knowledge, metaconceptual reflection on Knowledge Building contributed to conceptualchange. (p. 5)

### Discussion

These findingssupport  the  increased  emphasis  on  social  construction  of science knowledge,  and  specifically  it  supports  thenotion  that  collective  knowledge  building  mediated  by  Knowledge  Forum  have  positive  effects  on  learningscience (p. 6)

experimental students now tend to view knowledge not as discrete facts but complex knowledge that does notonly reside in external authority but can be constructed and derived from multiple sources. The findings alsosuggest  that  knowledge-building  students  are  more  likely  to  hold  the  view  that  knowledge  is  not  static  butchangeable and extendable over time. (p. 6)

Such  beliefs  seemed  highly  consistent  with  the  kinds  of  beliefs  to  be  fostered  in  a  collaborative knowledge-building community – When students work together to construct new understanding, they would be able  to  see  knowledge  as  constructed  collaboratively  and  that  knowledge  can  be  advanced,  improved  and extended.  There  is  considerable  work  on  roles  of  epistemological  beliefs  in  science  learning  (e.g.,  Hofer & Pintrinch, 2003). (p. 6)

We extended earlier research to conceptualchange  for  high-school  students  in  a  complex  domain  of  electrochemistry;  we  examined  conceptual  changemore  systematically  designing  tasks  that  tapped  students’  misconceptions. (p. 6)

Our results are consistent with earlier research on knowledge building discourse in elementary students’ scientific understanding (Hakkarainen, 2004; Zhang et al., 2007). (p. 6)

For  epistemological  change,  it  is  interesting  to  note  that  the  extent  to  which  students  engaged  in Knowledge  Forum  collaborative  activity  (reading  and  linking  more  notes)  contributed to  belief  change. It  is possible that students who read more and made more links and references to others’ notes might see knowledge as more complex and extendable. (p. 7)

These findings  suggest  the  important  role  of  knowledge-building  process  contributing  to  deep  conceptual understanding. (p. 7)

Epistemological  beliefs  were  correlated  with  several measures of preand post-test exam and conceptual-change question scores. We also found that students with more  sophisticated  beliefs were  engaged  in  deeper  reflection  and  inquiry.  These patterns  are  consistent  with current research on roles of epistemological beliefs on learning and conceptual change (e.g., Mason & Scirica, (p. 7)
