---
layout: post
categories: notes
title: 'Notes: Knowledge building: Theory, pedagogy, and technology'
tags:
- knowledge building
---

## References

**Citekey**: @scardamalia2006

Scardamalia, M., & Bereiter, C. (2006). Knowledge building: Theory, pedagogy, and technology. In R. K. Sawyer (Ed.), The Cambridge handbook of the learning sciences (pp. 97–115). Cambridge University Press.

## Notes

### From Computer Supported Intentional Learning to Knowledge Building Environments

::Many characteristics of
classroom life conspire to discourage intentional learning (Scardamalia & Bereiter,
1996), but a key factor seems to be the structure of classroom communication, in which
the teacher serves as the hub through which all information passes. Altering that
information flow was one of our goals when we designed the software application we
called CSILE::—Computer Supported Intentional Learning Environments— first used in
early prototype version in 1983 in a university course, more fully implemented in 1986 in
an elementary school (Scardamalia, Bereiter, McLean, Swallow, and Woodruff, 1989).

::Another motive guiding the design of CSILE was a belief that students themselves
represented a resource that was largely wasted and that could be brought into play
through network technology (Scardamalia & Bereiter, 1991).:: Classroom work with
CSILE proved this to be true beyond anything we had imagined. The classroom, as a
community, could indeed have a mental life that is not just the aggregate of individual
mental lives but something that provides a rich context within which those individual
mental lives take on new value. ::CSILE restructured the flow of information in the
classroom, so that questions, ideas, criticisms, suggestions, and the like were contributed
to a public space equally accessible to all, instead of it all passing through the teacher or
(as in e-mail) passing as messages between individual students.:: By linking these
contributions, students created an emergent hypertext that represented the collective
rather than only the individual knowledge of the participants. We introduced
epistemological markers (“My theory,” “I need to understand,” “New information,” and
so on), through “thinking types” that could be integrated into the text of notes, as students
chose, to encourage metadiscourse as well as discourse focused on the substantive issues
under investigation.

::By the 1990s the idea of knowledge building as the collaborative creation of public
knowledge had assumed ascendancy, with individual learning as an important and
demonstrable by-product (Scardamalia, Bereiter, & Lamon, 1994). In this light, we
undertook a major redesign of CSILE to boost it as an environment for objectifying ideas
and their interrelationships and to support collaborative work aimed at improving ideas.::

::The next generation of CSILE, called Knowledge Forum®, provides a knowledge
building environment for communities (classrooms, service and health organizations,
businesses, and so forth) to carry on the sociocognitive practices described above—
practices that are constitutive of knowledgeand innovationcreating organizations.:: This
is a continuing challenge; Knowledge Forum undergoes continual revision as theory
advances and experience uncovers new problems and opportunities.

Although communities based on shared interests do develop in some
threaded discussion forums, this technology [threaded discussion] provides little means for a group to organize
its efforts around a common goal.

Thus the database itself is an
emergent, representing at different stages in its development the advancing knowledge of
the community. ::From the users’ standpoint, the main constituents of a Knowledge Forum
database are notes and views. A view is an organizing background for notes. It may be a
concept map, a diagram, a scene—anything that visually adds structure and meaning to
the notes whose icons appear in it. Notes are contributed to views and may be moved
about to create organization within views. The same notes may appear in more than one
view.::

Wherever one is in a Knowledge Forum database, it is always possible to ::move
downward__, producing a lower-level note, comment, or subview; ::upward__, producing a
more inclusive note or a view of views; and sideways, linking views to views or linking
notes in different views. Notes themselves may contain graphics, animations, movies,
links to other applications and applets, and so on.

::Knowledge Forum lends itself to a high level of what we call “epistemic agency”
(Scardamalia, 2000).::

Forum provides “scaffolds” to help shape discourse to knowledge building
purposes—for instance, a set of theory-building scaffolds that include “My theory,”
“New information,” “This theory explains,” and “This theory cannot explain.”

::We designed Knowledge Forum not simply as a tool, but as a knowledge building
environment—that is, as a virtual space within which the main work of a knowledge
building group would take place (Scardamalia, 2003).

Knowledge Forum is where the main work takes place. It is where
the “state of knowledge” materializes, takes shape, and advances. It is where the results
of the various off-line activities contribute to the overall effort. ::
