---
layout: post
categories: notes
title: 'Understanding students practical epistemologies and their influence on learning through inquiry'
tags:
- epistemic beliefs
- inquiry learning
- science education
---

## References

**Citekey**: @sandoval2005


Sandoval, W. A. (2005). Understanding students’ practical epistemologies and their influence on learning through inquiry. Science Education, 89(4), 634–656. doi:10.1002/sce.20065


## Raw notes


Page: 9
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
Page: 9
What the above studies and others show is that students at all age levels commonly have
inarticulate ideas about the nature and role of scientiﬁc experimentation, and the relation
between method and theory.

Page: 9
Methods of Science.

Page: 9
Although Deanna Kuhn has argued that most children, and even lay adults, fail to distinguish
between theories and evidence (Kuhn, 1993; Kuhn et al., 1988), a number of researchers
have demonstrated that children as young as ﬁve (Sodian, Zaitchik, & Carey, 1991; Tschirgi,
1980) and certainly older students, can in fact distinguish ideas from experiments designed
to test those ideas (Carey & Smith, 1993; Chinn & Brewer, 1998; Koslowski, 1996; Sandoval
& Morrison, 2003; Smith et al., 2000).

Page: 9
Science as Constructed. Through middle school, students do not readily acknowledge
that scientiﬁc knowledge is constructed. Younger students tend to report that scientiﬁc
knowledge resides directly in experimental results, whereas older students talk about ideas
as being deﬁnitely right or wrong (Carey et al., 1989; Carey & Smith, 1993; Driver et al.,
1996; Mackay, 1971; Ryan & Aikenhead, 1992). By high school, there is evidence that some
students have developed notions that scientists construct models and theories (Driver et al.,
1996; Lederman & O’Malley, 1990; Solomon, Scott, & Duveen, 1996). Students who have
constructivist notions appear to have more productive science-learning strategies (Hammer,
1994), and perform better in inquiry-oriented environments (Linn & Songer, 1993; Tobin,
Tippins, & Hook, 1995; Windschitl & Andre, 1998).

Page: 9
 The general picture from such studies is that students’ ideas about for-
mal science follow a developmental trajectory toward increasing sophistication throughout
adolescence (Driver et al., 1996; Leach et al., 1997; Mackay, 1971; Ryan & Aikenhead,
1992), but tend to remain fairly na¨ıve through high school or even university instruction.


Page: 10
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
Page: 10
Forms of Scientific Knowledge.

Page: 10
Students also seem to think of scientiﬁc models in
a common everyday sense, as physical replicas of some aspect of the world, rather than
conceptual systems for explaining phenomena (Grosslight et al., 1991).

Page: 10
Through adolescence, most students seem to be-
lieve that scientiﬁc knowledge is, or at least can be, certain. Students talk about ideas as
either being right or wrong. As instruction tends to focus on what Duschl (1990) calls “ﬁnal
form science,” divorcing ideas from their historical development, most students seem to
believe that old ideas are simply wrong and replaced by newer ideas. For summaries, see
the reviews by (Abd-El-Khalick & Lederman, 2000b; Driver et al., 1996; Lederman, 1992).

Page: 10
Certainty of Scientific Knowledge.

Page: 10
Most students, even through high school, appear to
believe that hypotheses, theories, and laws are related in a linear hierarchy from less to more
proof. That is, hypotheses are guesses, theories are hypotheses supported by evidence, and
laws have been irrefutably proven (Carey et al., 1989; Ryan & Aikenhead, 1992; Sandoval
& Morrison, 2003; Smith et al., 2000).

Page: 10
In sum, we do not yet know very much about how students think of the diversity of sci-
entiﬁc methods, because assessments focus exclusively on experimentation as the method
of generating scientiﬁc knowledge.
