---
layout: post
categories: notes
title: 'Notes: Analyzing collaborative knowledge construction'
tags:
- CSCL
---

## References

**Citekey**: @hmelo-silver2003

## Notes

## Highlights

## References


Hmelo-Silver, C. E. (2003). Analyzing collaborative knowledge construction. Computers & Education, 41(4), 397–420. doi:10.1016/j.compedu.2003.07.001

## Summary

I got interested in this paper because of the CORDTRA diagram mentioned at an AERA session. The main message from this article is discourse data need to be analyzed with multiple methods in order to get a clear understanding about what's going on with collaborative learning or knowledge construction. In two studies, Cindy mainly explores three types of techniques: quantitative interpretation of fine-grained qualitative coding (Chi, 1997), qualitative interpretation of coarser level of data, and CORDTRA diagram that makes salient the relation of different discourse activities.

The paper makes me rethink our analysis on WoC data --re-analyzing data from multiple angle will bring about a great paper from that project. Secondly, I am thinking about a research tool that allows researchers to toggle among different modes of interpreting results as long as all data are properly coded, etc. This presents to be an interesting design challenge with great value to the research community.

## Raw notes

////////////////////////////////////////////////////////////////////////////////////////////////////
// Summary of Comments on Hmelo-Silver 2003 Analyzing collaborative knowledge construction -annotated
////////////////////////////////////////////////////////////////////////////////////////////////////

Page: 2
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
Page: 2
Author: bodong  Subject: Highlight  Date: 21/05/2013, 9:35:42 PM
Sociocultural theories of learning place a great emphasis on analyzing discourse in order to
understand learning as well as stressing the importance of tools in mediating knowledge con-
struction (Cole, 1996; Engestro¨m, 1999; Palincsar, 1998; Pea, 1993).


Page: 3
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
Page: 3
Author: bodong  Subject: Highlight  Date: 21/05/2013, 9:36:29 PM
Borrowing from the verbal data analysis
tradition of Chi (1997), I extend this methodology to analyzing group interactions to quantify
qualitative information. In addition, the quantiﬁed information and qualitative data can be used
in complementary ways to understand mediated collaborative learning. The goals of the analyses
reported in this paper are to be able to reliably understand the content and cognitive processes
that occur as students are trying to learn and the role that tools might play in mediating learning.

Page: 3
Author: bodong  Subject: Highlight  Date: 21/05/2013, 9:36:36 PM
Luckin and colleagues took a diﬀerent approach to examining how alternative ways of struc-
turing hypermedia aﬀected how students engaged in collaborative knowledge construction
(Luckin et al., 2001). They coded all talk into task-oriented, non-task, and content categories with
high reliability. Rather than looking at the summary frequencies of these categories, they plotted
the occurrence of these kinds of talk and the software features in a chronologically ordered
representation of discourse and features used (CORDFU) diagram.

Page: 3
Author: bodong  Subject: Highlight  Date: 21/05/2013, 9:36:21 PM
These sort of everyday learning practices have been studied using a variety
of techniques including discourse and conversation analysis, ethnography, and other qualitative
methods (e.g., Cazden, 1986; Cobb & Yackel, 1996; Koschmann, Glenn, & Conlee, 2000).


Page: 4
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
Page: 4
Author: bodong  Subject: Highlight  Date: 21/05/2013, 9:36:47 PM
This analysis used both quantitative and qualitative
methods to examine the role of prior knowledge on the construction of a JPS.

Page: 4
Author: bodong  Subject: Highlight  Date: 21/05/2013, 9:36:59 PM
This study uses both ﬁne-
grained coding and coarser qualitative analysis to capture both the general cognitive and social
characteristics of JPS construction, as well as illustrative examples that demonstrate phenomena
that go beyond the single turn. Together, they paint a rich picture of JPS construction.

Page: 4
Author: bodong  Subject: Highlight  Date: 21/05/2013, 9:37:05 PM
The
categorical variables were coded on a turn-by-turn basis in the following categories: knowledge,
metacognition, interpretation, and collaboration.

Page: 4
Author: bodong  Subject: Highlight  Date: 21/05/2013, 9:36:54 PM
These
two groups were studied in detail to examine how diﬀerences in knowledge aﬀected collaborative
knowledge construction.

Page: 4
Author: bodong  Subject: Highlight  Date: 21/05/2013, 9:36:41 PM
1. Study 1: the Oncology Thinking Cap: simulations as a collaborative context


Page: 8
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
Page: 8
Author: bodong  Subject: Highlight  Date: 21/05/2013, 9:37:21 PM
The LK group ran
more trials (14) and took more conversational turns (2973) to converge on a satisfactory trial
design than the HK group (six trials and 1773 turns). The ﬁne-grained coding illuminates what
the students talked about in their conversational turns.

Page: 8
Author: bodong  Subject: Highlight  Date: 21/05/2013, 9:37:31 PM
the HK group demonstrated a higher percentage of metacognitive state-
ments than the LK group.

Page: 8
Author: bodong  Subject: Highlight  Date: 21/05/2013, 9:37:26 PM
Not surprisingly, the
HK group referred to conceptual knowledge more than the LK group

Page: 8
Author: bodong  Subject: Highlight  Date: 21/05/2013, 9:37:13 PM
1.1. Quantitative results


Page: 10
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
Page: 10
Author: bodong  Subject: Highlight  Date: 21/05/2013, 9:37:45 PM
The category frequencies are extremely informative regarding some aspects of the knowledge
construction process, but do not fully address how students constructed a JPS.

Page: 10
Author: bodong  Subject: Highlight  Date: 21/05/2013, 9:37:51 PM
Initially, the students needed to construct a joint understanding of the task, software, and
relevant variables in the clinical trial design process. The HK group was able to do this more
quickly than the LK group, getting the big picture of the clinical trial design process after the
second trial.

Page: 10
Author: bodong  Subject: Highlight  Date: 21/05/2013, 9:37:40 PM
1.2. Qualitative results: construction of the joint problem space


Page: 12
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
Page: 12
Author: bodong  Subject: Highlight  Date: 21/05/2013, 9:38:07 PM
2. Study 2: studying tool-mediated collaboration in a problem-based learning group

Page: 12
Author: bodong  Subject: Highlight  Date: 21/05/2013, 9:38:18 PM
The entire
transcript was coded for the types of questions and statements in the discourse.

Page: 12
Author: bodong  Subject: Highlight  Date: 21/05/2013, 9:38:12 PM
One goal of this study was to examine how the
students collaboratively constructed knowledge. A second goal was to examine how use of a
representational tool helped mediate learning. Thus, this study focused on how content, process,
and tools interact during social knowledge construction. Three diﬀerent analyses were conducted
to address these goals. As in Study 1, verbal data analysis (Chi, 1997) was used to conduct a ﬁne-
grained analysis of the discourse and additional qualitative analysis was used to capture colla-
borative explanations. In addition, the CORDFU technique developed by Luckin and colleagues
(2001) was adapted to address the second goal.

Page: 12
Author: bodong  Subject: Highlight  Date: 21/05/2013, 9:38:01 PM
Although this is a
brief snapshot of the analytic technique, it demonstrates how the ﬁne-grained coding and coarser
analyses complement each other and provide a more complete picture of collaborative knowledge
construction than either technique would alone. The ﬁne-grained analysis provides a view of the
data that summarizes the cognitive and social processes involved in constructing the JPS. It does
not convey all the richness of the sequence of events or social interaction. The second analysis
complements the summary analysis by demonstrating bigger units of activity and how these are
mediated by the tools that are available.


Page: 13
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
Page: 13
Author: bodong  Subject: Highlight  Date: 21/05/2013, 9:38:31 PM
2.1. Quantitative results: questions and explanations

Page: 13
Author: bodong  Subject: Highlight  Date: 21/05/2013, 9:38:36 PM
Students were expected to ask a substantial number of questions. The meta questions were
expected to be the major category for the facilitator. The distribution of questions is shown in
Fig. 1. Because these were experienced PBL students, they were also expected to pose many meta
questions. A total of 809 questions were asked. The students asked 226 short answer questions, 51
long answer questions, and 189 meta questions.

Page: 13
Author: bodong  Subject: Highlight  Date: 21/05/2013, 9:38:25 PM
 The representation construction
activity lasted for approximately one half hour and was coded at a very coarse level as to whether
the drawing actions focused on anatomy and physiology, biochemistry, or clinical signs and
symptoms. To examine how the representation mediated the students’ collaborative knowledge
construction, a chronologically-ordered representation of discourse and tool-related activity
(CORDTRA) was constructed in order to gain an integrated understanding of how students used
the representation as a tool for collaborative knowledge construction (Luckin et al., 2001).


Page: 15
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
Page: 15
Author: bodong  Subject: Highlight  Date: 21/05/2013, 9:38:44 PM
Eighty percent of these state-
ments were directly related to concepts that were important for the problem. The distribution of
statement types is shown in Fig. 2.


Page: 16
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
Page: 16
Author: bodong  Subject: Highlight  Date: 21/05/2013, 9:39:24 PM
 adapting the cordfu methodology (Luckin et al., 2001; Luckin et al., 1998) to
create a chronologically-ordered representation of discourse and tool-related activity (cordtra)
diagram, shown in Fig. 3.

Page: 16
Author: bodong  Subject: Highlight  Date: 21/05/2013, 9:38:51 PM
2.2. An integrated view of the ‘‘drawing episode’’: combining qualitative and quantitative results


Page: 17
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
Page: 17
Author: bodong  Subject: Highlight  Date: 21/05/2013, 9:39:30 PM
2.2.1. Interpreting CORDTRA


Page: 19
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
Page: 19
Author: bodong  Subject: Highlight  Date: 21/05/2013, 9:39:41 PM
The CORDTRA diagram shows the relation of the discourse to the drawing activity. This
makes salient the nature of student talk as they switch between diﬀerent levels of representation.
At the junctures where student drawing activity switches from representations of basic science
processes to signs and symptoms, or between levels of science, the students engage in causal ela-
borations.


Page: 20
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
Page: 20
Author: bodong  Subject: Highlight  Date: 21/05/2013, 9:39:49 PM
This excerpt corresponds to lines 347–374 on the CORDTRA diagram. Here the students were
getting closer to bringing the problem of demyelination to speciﬁc structures (the dorsal column)
and then mapping it onto the signs and symptoms that the patient is actually exhibiting. More-
over, they were monitoring the ﬁt between the symptoms that she is exhibiting and their theore-
tical descriptions.


Page: 21
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
Page: 21
Author: bodong  Subject: Highlight  Date: 21/05/2013, 9:39:55 PM
This analysis provides considerable information about
the relationship among variables and representation construction that the frequency counts do
not provide. The ﬁne-grained analysis summarizes the cognitive and social activity, but does not
capture the richness of the collaborative explanations that students construct. The analysis of the
larger units of discourse help shed light on this phenomenon, as well as providing some infor-
mation about how the representation served as a tool for the students’ collaborative thinking.
The CORDTRA diagram makes salient the relation of metacognitive talk and causal explanation
to the conceptual space covered in the drawing activity and supports making complex inferences
that might otherwise be diﬃcult. This allows exploration of the relationship between tool use (in
this case, a drawing) and collaborative knowledge construction. The diﬀerent methods provide
the opportunity to see more of the elephant than any one method does by itself.
